README.md, before:

# openthread

[![CI](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-openthread/actions/workflows/rust_ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-openthread/actions/workflows/rust_ci.yml)
[![crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/openthread.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/openthread)
[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-esp--rs-brightgreen)](https://esp-rs.github.io/esp-rs/esp-openthread/index.html)
[![Matrix](https://img.shields.io/matrix/esp-rs:matrix.org?label=join%20matrix&color=BEC5C9&logo=matrix)](https://matrix.to/#/#esp-rs:matrix.org)

Platform-agnostic, async Rust bindings for the [`OpenThread`](https://openthread.io/) library.

Tailored for Rust embedded baremetal.

The [crate](openthread) does not depend on any platform features and only needs an implementation of a single trait - [`Radio`](openthread/src/radio.rs) - that represents the IEEE 802.15.4 PHY radio. 
The radio might be located on the same die, or the user might provide an implementation that communicates with the actual radio over UART, SPI, USB, etc.

Two IEEE 802.15.4 radios are supported out of the box:
- The ESP32C6 and ESP32H2 radio (enable the `esp-ieee802154` feature; see [examples](examples/esp));
- The NRF radio (enable the `embasy-nrf` feature; see [examples](examples/nrf)).

## Build

For certain MCUs / Rust targets, the OpenThread libraries are pre-compiled for convenience.
Current list (might be extended upon request):
- `riscv32imac-unknown-none-elf` (ESP32C6 and ESP32H2)
- `thumbv7em-none-eabi` (NRF52)
- `thumbv6m-none-eabi` No chip with IEEE802.15.4 radio on this target (to our knowledge), but can be used with `openthread` RCP (radio offloading)

**For these targets you only need `rustc`/`cargo` as usual!**

Small caveat: since `openthread` does a few calls into the C standard library (primarily `str*` functions), at link time, it is up to the user to poly-fill the `str*` syscalls - [either with the MCU ROM functions](examples/esp/.cargo/config.toml), or by [depending](examples/nrf/Cargo.toml) on [`tinyrlibc`](https://github.com/rust-embedded-community/tinyrlibc), or with both.

### Build for other targets / custom build

For targets where pre-compiled libs are not available (including for the Host itself), a standard `build.rs` build is also supported.
For the on-the-fly OpenThread CMake build to work, you'll need to install and set in your `$PATH`:
- The GCC toolchain correspponding to your Rust target, with **working** `foo-bar-gcc -print-sysroot` command
- Recent Clang (for Espressif `xtensa`, [it must be the Espressif fork](https://crates.io/crates/espup), but for all other chips, the stock Clang would work)
- CMake and Ninja

As per above, since `openthread` does a few calls into the C standard library (primarily `str*` functions), the GCC toolchain needs to have the `newlib` (or other libc headers for e.g. non-embedded scenarios) in its sysroot, which is usually the case anyway. `newlib` however is only used _at compile-time_ on baremetal targets (for a few libc headers) and not linked-in.

Examples of GCC toolchains that are known to work fine:
- For ARM (Cortex M CPUs and others) - the [ARM GNU toolchain](https://developer.arm.com/Tools%20and%20Software/GNU%20Toolchain);
  - Note that the Ubuntu `arm-none-eabi-gcc` system package does **NOT** work, as it does not print a sysroot, i.e. `arm-none-eabi-gcc -print-sysroot` returns an empty response, and furthermore, the `newlib` headers are installed in a separate location from the arch headers;
- For RISCV - the [Espressif RISCV toolchain](https://github.com/espressif/crosstool-NG/releases). The ["official" RISCV GNU toolchain](https://github.com/riscv-collab/riscv-gnu-toolchain) should also work;
- For xtensa (Espressif ESP32 and ESP32SXX MCUs) - the [Espressif xtensa toolchain](https://github.com/espressif/crosstool-NG/releases);
- For the Host machine (non-embedded) - your pre-installed toolchain would work just fine.

## Features

- MTD (Minimal Thread Device) functionality
- Optional FTD (Full Thread Device) functionality
- Optional integration with [`embassy-net`]() and [`edge-nal`]()
- Out of the box support for the IEEE 802.15.4 radio in [Espressif](openthread/src/esp.rs) and [Nordic Semiconductor](openthread/src/nrf.rs) chips

## Next

- Sleepy end-device

## Non-Goals

- Thread Border Router functionality

## Status

The examples (native OpenThread UDP sockets; `embassy-net` integration; SRP) build and run on Espressif MCUs, and on the NRF52840.

## Testing

Build and flash the [OT-CLI](https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/master/examples/openthread/ot_cli) on ESP32C6 or ESP32H2.

```
> dataset set active 0e080000000000010000000300000b35060004001fffe002083a90e3a319a904940708fd1fa298dbd1e3290510fe0458f7db96354eaa6041b880ea9c0f030f4f70656e5468726561642d35386431010258d10410888f813c61972446ab616ee3c556a5910c0402a0f7f8

> dataset active
Active Timestamp: 1
Channel: 11
Channel Mask: 0x07fff800
Ext PAN ID: 3a90e3a319a90494
Mesh Local Prefix: fd1f:a298:dbd1:e329::/64
Network Key: fe0458f7db96354eaa6041b880ea9c0f
Network Name: OpenThread-58d1
PAN ID: 0x58d1
PSKc: 888f813c61972446ab616ee3c556a591
Security Policy: 672 onrc
Done

> ifconfig up

> thread start

```

Flash the example to an ESP32-C6 or ESP32-H2 - use a feature for choosing the build-target.

It should output something like
```
Initializing
Currently assigned addresses
fdde:ad00:beef:0:f9ee:5d6d:7fe6:daab
fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc

ChangedFlags(Ipv6AddressAdded | ThreadRoleChanged | ThreadLlAddressChanged | ThreadMeshLocalAddressChanged | ThreadKeySequenceChanged | ThreadNetworkDataChanged | Ipv6MulticastSubscribed | ThreadPanIdChanged | ThreadNetworkNameChanged | ThreadExtendedPanIdChanged | ThreadNetworkKeyChanged | ThreadNetworkInterfaceStateChanged | ActiveDatasetChanged)
Currently assigned addresses
fdde:ad00:beef:0:f9ee:5d6d:7fe6:daab
fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc

ChangedFlags(ThreadRoleChanged | ThreadRlocAdded | ThreadPartitionIdChanged | ThreadNetworkDataChanged | PendingDatasetChanged)
Currently assigned addresses
fdde:ad00:beef::ff:fe00:8019
fdde:ad00:beef:0:f9ee:5d6d:7fe6:daab
fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc
```

Please note the link-local address. (fe80::...)

Back in the OT-CLI ping the device (using the address from above)
```
> ping fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc

16 bytes from fe80:0:0:0:906d:1cce:1bc9:8d07: icmp_seq=15 hlim=64 time=13ms
1 packets transmitted, 1 packets received. Packet loss = 0.0%. Round-trip min/avg/max = 13/13.0/13 ms.
Done
```

Now send and receive a UDP message (using the address from above)
```
> udp open

Done
> udp bind :: 1212

Done
> udp send fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc 1212 Hello

Done
5 bytes from fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc 1212 Hello
```

So it connected and you can successfully ping the device. Receiving and sending UDP packets also works. 🎉

Commit message:

enhance the readme with tips on acquiring the gnu riscv toolchain

README.md, after:

# openthread

[![CI](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-openthread/actions/workflows/rust_ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-openthread/actions/workflows/rust_ci.yml)
[![crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/openthread.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/openthread)
[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-esp--rs-brightgreen)](https://esp-rs.github.io/esp-rs/esp-openthread/index.html)
[![Matrix](https://img.shields.io/matrix/esp-rs:matrix.org?label=join%20matrix&color=BEC5C9&logo=matrix)](https://matrix.to/#/#esp-rs:matrix.org)

Platform-agnostic, async Rust bindings for the [`OpenThread`](https://openthread.io/) library.

Tailored for Rust embedded baremetal.

The [crate](openthread) does not depend on any platform features and only needs an implementation of a single trait - [`Radio`](openthread/src/radio.rs) - that represents the IEEE 802.15.4 PHY radio. 
The radio might be located on the same die, or the user might provide an implementation that communicates with the actual radio over UART, SPI, USB, etc.

Two IEEE 802.15.4 radios are supported out of the box:
- The ESP32C6 and ESP32H2 radio (enable the `esp-ieee802154` feature; see [examples](examples/esp));
- The NRF radio (enable the `embasy-nrf` feature; see [examples](examples/nrf)).

## Build

For certain MCUs / Rust targets, the OpenThread libraries are pre-compiled with a commonly used set of defaults for convenience. The defaults allow running a minimal thread device (MTD) that registers services using SRP.
Current list (might be extended upon request):
- `riscv32imac-unknown-none-elf` (ESP32C6 and ESP32H2)
- `thumbv7em-none-eabi` (NRF52)
- `thumbv6m-none-eabi` No chip with IEEE802.15.4 radio on this target (to our knowledge), but can be used with `openthread` RCP (radio offloading)

**For these targets you only need `rustc`/`cargo` as usual!**

Small caveat: since `openthread` does a few calls into the C standard library (primarily `str*` functions), at link time, it is up to the user to poly-fill the `str*` syscalls - [either with the MCU ROM functions](examples/esp/.cargo/config.toml), or by [depending](examples/nrf/Cargo.toml) on [`tinyrlibc`](https://github.com/rust-embedded-community/tinyrlibc), or with both.

### Build for other targets / custom build

For targets where pre-compiled libs are not available (including for the Host itself), or for when additional OpenThread features beyond the defaults are desired, a standard `build.rs` build is also supported.
For the on-the-fly OpenThread CMake build to work, you'll need to install and set in your `$PATH`:
- The GCC toolchain correspponding to your Rust target, with **working** `foo-bar-gcc -print-sysroot` command
- Recent Clang (for Espressif `xtensa`, [it must be the Espressif fork](https://crates.io/crates/espup), but for all other chips, the stock Clang would work)
- CMake and Ninja

As per above, since `openthread` does a few calls into the C standard library (primarily `str*` functions), the GCC toolchain needs to have the `newlib` (or other libc headers for e.g. non-embedded scenarios) in its sysroot, which is usually the case anyway. `newlib` however is only used _at compile-time_ on baremetal targets (for a few libc headers) and not linked-in.

Examples of GCC toolchains that are known to work fine:
- For ARM (Cortex M CPUs and others) - the [ARM GNU toolchain](https://developer.arm.com/Tools%20and%20Software/GNU%20Toolchain);
  - Note that the Ubuntu `arm-none-eabi-gcc` system package does **NOT** work, as it does not print a sysroot, i.e. `arm-none-eabi-gcc -print-sysroot` returns an empty response, and furthermore, the `newlib` headers are installed in a separate location from the arch headers;
- For RISCV - the [Espressif RISCV toolchain](https://github.com/espressif/crosstool-NG/releases). The ["official" RISCV GNU toolchain](https://github.com/riscv-collab/riscv-gnu-toolchain) should also work (see below for guidance on building this);
- For xtensa (Espressif ESP32 and ESP32SXX MCUs) - the [Espressif xtensa toolchain](https://github.com/espressif/crosstool-NG/releases);
- For the Host machine (non-embedded) - your pre-installed toolchain would work just fine.

### Compiling the RISCV GNU Toolchain
As above, the requirements are for the toolchain to have `newlib`, so `--disable-linux` must be specified. For the `riscv32imac-unknown-none-elf` target (ESP32-C6 and ESP32-H2), the following options will produce a usable build:
```
./configure --prefix=/opt/riscv --with-arch=rv32imac --with-abi=ilp32 --disable-linux
make
```

Don't forget to include the resulting binaries in your path:
```
export PATH=$PATH:/opt/riscv/bin
```


## Features

- MTD (Minimal Thread Device) functionality
- Optional FTD (Full Thread Device) functionality
- Optional integration with [`embassy-net`]() and [`edge-nal`]()
- Out of the box support for the IEEE 802.15.4 radio in [Espressif](openthread/src/esp.rs) and [Nordic Semiconductor](openthread/src/nrf.rs) chips

## Next

- Sleepy end-device

## Non-Goals

- Thread Border Router functionality

## Status

The examples (native OpenThread UDP sockets; `embassy-net` integration; SRP) build and run on Espressif MCUs, and on the NRF52840.

## Testing

Build and flash the [OT-CLI](https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/master/examples/openthread/ot_cli) on ESP32C6 or ESP32H2.

```
> dataset set active 0e080000000000010000000300000b35060004001fffe002083a90e3a319a904940708fd1fa298dbd1e3290510fe0458f7db96354eaa6041b880ea9c0f030f4f70656e5468726561642d35386431010258d10410888f813c61972446ab616ee3c556a5910c0402a0f7f8

> dataset active
Active Timestamp: 1
Channel: 11
Channel Mask: 0x07fff800
Ext PAN ID: 3a90e3a319a90494
Mesh Local Prefix: fd1f:a298:dbd1:e329::/64
Network Key: fe0458f7db96354eaa6041b880ea9c0f
Network Name: OpenThread-58d1
PAN ID: 0x58d1
PSKc: 888f813c61972446ab616ee3c556a591
Security Policy: 672 onrc
Done

> ifconfig up

> thread start

```

Flash the example to an ESP32-C6 or ESP32-H2 - use a feature for choosing the build-target.

It should output something like
```
Initializing
Currently assigned addresses
fdde:ad00:beef:0:f9ee:5d6d:7fe6:daab
fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc

ChangedFlags(Ipv6AddressAdded | ThreadRoleChanged | ThreadLlAddressChanged | ThreadMeshLocalAddressChanged | ThreadKeySequenceChanged | ThreadNetworkDataChanged | Ipv6MulticastSubscribed | ThreadPanIdChanged | ThreadNetworkNameChanged | ThreadExtendedPanIdChanged | ThreadNetworkKeyChanged | ThreadNetworkInterfaceStateChanged | ActiveDatasetChanged)
Currently assigned addresses
fdde:ad00:beef:0:f9ee:5d6d:7fe6:daab
fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc

ChangedFlags(ThreadRoleChanged | ThreadRlocAdded | ThreadPartitionIdChanged | ThreadNetworkDataChanged | PendingDatasetChanged)
Currently assigned addresses
fdde:ad00:beef::ff:fe00:8019
fdde:ad00:beef:0:f9ee:5d6d:7fe6:daab
fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc
```

Please note the link-local address. (fe80::...)

Back in the OT-CLI ping the device (using the address from above)
```
> ping fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc

16 bytes from fe80:0:0:0:906d:1cce:1bc9:8d07: icmp_seq=15 hlim=64 time=13ms
1 packets transmitted, 1 packets received. Packet loss = 0.0%. Round-trip min/avg/max = 13/13.0/13 ms.
Done
```

Now send and receive a UDP message (using the address from above)
```
> udp open

Done
> udp bind :: 1212

Done
> udp send fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc 1212 Hello

Done
5 bytes from fe80::6cec:6ace:f5ff:30bc 1212 Hello
```

So it connected and you can successfully ping the device. Receiving and sending UDP packets also works. 🎉
